[API-2108]UCD Documentation (#10)
hazelcast/clc-docs: docs/modules/ROOT/pages/yaml-job-definition.adoc

> = YAML Job Definition

Reviewer: ```suggestion
= YAML Pipeline Definition
```

> The stages of a Jet job can be defined with in a yaml file without any Java code interaction. A basic streaming job consists of three main stages. These are source, transform and sink stages. The transformation stage is optional, and a pipeline can have multiple transformation steps. In order to define these stages for your job, you can benefit from a yaml definition without any codding effort.

Reviewer 2: basic job may have 2 or more stages.

> The stages of a Jet job can be defined with in a yaml file without any Java code interaction. A basic streaming job consists of three main stages. These are source, transform and sink stages. The transformation stage is optional, and a pipeline can have multiple transformation steps. In order to define these stages for your job, you can benefit from a yaml definition without any codding effort.

Reviewer 2: typo: codding --> coding

> The stages of a Jet job can be defined with in a yaml file without any Java code interaction. A basic streaming job consists of two or more stages. These are source, transform and sink stages. The transformation stage is optional, and a pipeline can have multiple transformation steps. In order to define these stages for your job, you can benefit from a yaml definition without any coding effort.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The stages of a Jet pipeline can be defined with in a yaml file without any Java code interaction. A basic streaming job consists of two or more stages. These are source, transform and sink stages. The transformation stage is optional, and a pipeline can have multiple transformation steps. In order to define these stages for your job, you can benefit from a yaml definition without any coding effort.
```

> NOTE: This feature is only available on Viridian.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
NOTE: This feature is only available if your cluster is running on Viridian.
```

== YAML File Structure

The structure of pipeline definition in a yaml file can be seen below. The yaml file should be named as `jet_config.yaml`.

*Example*

[source, yaml]
----
pipeline:
  source:
    type: # Type of the source, see th table for available types.

  transform: # Optional Step
    - type: PYTHON # Only supported transform method for now.

  sink:
    type: # Where the output will be sink into. See th table for available types.
----

=== Source Stages
There are three types of source can be defined in a yaml job definition. 

==== File Source

[cols="1m,1a,2a,1a"]
|===
|Parameter|Required|Description|Default

|type: FILE
|Yes
|Defines the source type of the pipeline as a file.
|

|path: /path/to/file_or_directory
|Yes
|File path to source.
|

|glob: "*.json"
|Yes
|A global filter pattern to select files in given directory.
| *
|===

[source, yaml]
----
pipeline:
  source:
    type: FILE
    path: "src/my_logs"
    glob: "*.json"
----

==== Item Source

> This source type acts as a batch resource.

Author: Fixed at https://github.com/hazelcast/clc-docs/pull/10/commits/2e8f9c0178b3d0c6c738c19cf23c063f91c0d1d8

[cols="1m,1a,2a,1a"]
|===
|Parameter|Required|Description|Default

|type: ITEMS
|Yes
|Defines the source type of the pipeline as a item source.
|

|items: [1, 2, 3]
|Yes
|Item list to be sourced to job.
|

|===

[source, yaml]
----
pipeline:
  source:
    type: ITEMS
    items: [1, 2, 3]
----

==== Item Stream Source

> Item stream produces sequential numbers continuously to the pipeline in a defined frequency.

Author: Fixed at https://github.com/hazelcast/clc-docs/pull/10/commits/2e8f9c0178b3d0c6c738c19cf23c063f91c0d1d8

|type: KAFKA
|Yes
|Defines the source type of the pipeline as a Kafka source.
|

|topic: "topic_name"
|Yes
|Topic name to be subscribed.
|

|key-deserializer: "type_name"
|Yes
|The serializer to be used for key value.  
|

|value-deserializer: "type_name"
|Yes
|The serializer to be used for value.  
|

|properties:
|Yes
|Kafka props to be passed to Kafka consumer.
|

|===

[source, yaml]
----
pipeline:
    source:
        type: KAFKA
        topic: "topic_name"
        key-deserializer: "string"
        value-deserializer: "json"
        properties:
            bootstrap.servers: "server_address:port"
            auto.offset.reset: earliest
----

==== MAP Source

This source type allows you to work on map. This stage works as a batch.

[cols="1m,1a,2a,1a"]
|===
|Parameter|Required|Description|Default

|type: MAP
|Yes
|Defines the source type of the pipeline as a map.
|

|map: "myMapName"
|Yes
|Map name to be used as a batch data source.
|

|===

[source, yaml]
----
pipeline:
    source:
        type: MAP
        map: "myMapName"
----

==== MAP Journal Source

This sources type allows you to work on a entry that is put into defined map. This stage works as a stream.

> TIP: This feature requires additional configuration on the map. You should enable _Event Journal_ for your map. link:https://docs.hazelcast.com/hazelcast/latest/data-structures/event-journal#hide-nav[For details.]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
TIP: This feature requires additional configuration on the map. You should enable _Event Journal_ for your map. See link:https://docs.hazelcast.com/hazelcast/latest/data-structures/event-journal#hide-nav[event journal documentation] for details.
```

[source, yaml]
----
pipeline:
    source:
        type: MAP-JOURNAL
        map: "myMapName"
        start-from: OLDEST
----

=== Transform Step

In this step, you can shape you data or do computation. The return value will be passed to next step. 

NOTE: Currently, only supported language on transform step is Python. You can transform your data using Python. Also, this step only works with streaming sources.

==== Transformation in Python

[cols="1m,1a,2a,1a"]
|===
|Parameter|Required|Description|Default

|type: PYTHON
|Yes
|Defines the transformation type.
|

|base-image: "hazelcast/python-runtime-base:3.11"
|Yes
|The base image to be used to run given Python code. You can customize the image using the base one.
|

|module: "transformation.transform" 
|Optional
|The name of package and transformation function. The format is `package_name.func_name`.
|transformation.transform

|===

[source,yaml]
----
  transform:
    - type: PYTHON
      base-image: "hazelcast/python-runtime-base:3.11"
      module: "transformation.transform"
----

The Jet Python step expects two functions in your Python code.

[cols="1m,1a,2a,1a"]
|===
|Function|Required|Description|Type

|on_setup(config)

> |Optional

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|No
```

Author: This is optinonal.

|This function is invoked while runtime is starting. You can register your serializers  to `config` object. `config` object is type of Hazelcast Python client config. link:https://hazelcast.readthedocs.io/en/latest/config.html[For details.] 
|Hazelcast Python Client Config Object

|transform(data)
|Yes
|The function will be invoked when data reaches to the step. If you have a custom type you can prepare and register your serializer in `on_step(config)` function.
|The `data` argument type depends on previous step in the pipeline.

|===

*Example*

> Assume that you have a map journal source, and the source contains `City` object. When a new object put the source map, it will be streamed to the pipeline. In transform step, here, the object type of `data` argument will be a key value pair since source is a map and holds key value pairs. The key value is an integer number in this example, and value is `City` object.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Assume that you have a map journal source, and the source contains `City` object. When a new object put the source map, it will be streamed to the pipeline. In transform step, the object type of `data` argument will be a key value pair since source is a map and holds key value pairs. The key value is an integer number in this example, and value is `City` object.
```

    # a map.
    return DeserializingMapEntry(key=data.get_key(), value=c)
----

You should also check the yaml definition of the example. In this pipeline, source is a streamed map which is a journal. Transform step is our Python example. The sink is a map.

[source,yaml]
----
pipeline:

  source:
    type: MAP-JOURNAL
    map: "cities"
    start-from: OLDEST

  transform:
    - type: PYTHON
      base-image: "hazelcast/python-runtime-base:3.11"
      module: "transformation.transform"

  sink:
    type: MAP
    map: "sinkMap"
----

If you have a dependencies, prepare a `requirements.txt` file, and place all files in a directory.

The folder should contain;
[source]
----
--/
--transformation.py
--jet_config.yaml
--requirements.txt
----

Then, you can submit this directory using `clc job submit -c MY_CLUSTER --name my_job .`
Please, link:https://docs.hazelcast.com/clc/latest/clc-job#clc-job-submit[visit] clc job command for more information on submitting.

=== Sink Step

After streaming process is completed, data should sink to some of these places.

==== JDBC Sink

[cols="1m,1a,2a,1a"]
|===
|Parameter|Required|Description|Default

|type: JDBC
|Yes

> |Defines the sink place of pipeline.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
|Defines the sink as JDBC
```

|

|url: "jdbc:mysql://localhost:3306/mysql"
|Yes
|Connection string to the JDBC source.
|

|query: REPLACE INTO into(value) values(?)
|Yes

> |Query statement to be run while inserting data to the JDBC.link:https://docs.hazelcast.com/hazelcast/latest/integrate/jdbc-connector#dbc-as-a-sink[For more details about JDBC connector.]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
|Query statement to be run while inserting data to the JDBC. For further information on using JDBC as a sink, see the xref:integrate/jdbc-connector.adoc#jdbc-as-a-sink[] section of the JDBC Connector topic.
```

|

|===

[source, yaml]
----
pipeline:
  sink:
    type: JDBC
    url: "jdbc:mysql://localhost:3306/mysql"
    query: |
      REPLACE INTO into(value) values(?)
----

==== Kafka Sink

[cols="1m,1a,2a,1a"]
|===
|Parameter|Required|Description|Default

|type: KAFKA
|Yes

> |Defines the sink type of the pipeline.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
|Defines the sink as Kafka.
```

|

|topic: "topic_name"
|Yes

> |Topic name to be pushed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
|Topic name to push.
```

|

|key-deserializer: "type_name"
|Yes

> |The serializer to be used for key value.  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
|The serializer used for the key.  
```

|

|value-deserializer: "type_name"
|Yes

> |The serializer to be used for value.  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
|The serializer used for the value.  
```

|

|properties:
|Yes

> |Kafka props to be passed to Kafka producer.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
|Kafka properties to pass to the Kafka producer.
```

|

|===

[source, yaml]
----
pipeline:
  sink:
    type: KAFKA
    topic: "topic_name"
    key-deserializer: "string"
    value-deserializer: "json"
    properties:
      bootstrap.servers: "kafka_address:9092"
      auto.offset.reset: earliest
----

=== Logger Sink

> It is a simple sink option. It sinks to server logs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This is the simplest sink option, where the data sinks to server logs.
```

[cols="1m,1a,2a,1a"]
|===
|Parameter|Required|Description|Default

|type: LOGGER
|Yes
|Defines the sink type of the pipeline as logger.
|

|===

[source, yaml]
----
pipeline:
  sink:
    type: LOGGER
----

=== Map Sink

Sinks streamed data to a map. The given value should be a key-value pair.

[cols="1m,1a,2a,1a"]
|===
|Parameter|Required|Description|Default

|type: MAP
|Yes
|Defines the sink type of the pipeline as map.
|

|map: "myMapName"
|Yes

> |Map name to be sink.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
|Name of the Map to use as sink.
```
